# 3. Configuration

## 3.1 Overview

E2guardian is a web content filter and sits in between the browser on your client systems
and the web server in the internet:

    -------------    :8080--------------     ------------    ------------
    | Webbrowser |------->| e2guardian |--->| Router/FW |--->| Internet |
    --------------        --------------     ------------    ------------

If you choosed to install e2guardian with an additional proxy you will have:

    -------------    :8080--------------  :3128---------    -----------    ------------
    | Webbrowser |------->| e2guardian |------>| squid |--->|Router/FW|--->| Internet |
    --------------        --------------       ---------    -----------    ------------

Adding a plugin for virus content scanning, you will have the following configuration:

    -------------    :8080--------------  :3128---------    -----------    ------------
    | Webbrowser |------->| e2guardian |------>| squid |--->|Router/FW|--->| Internet |
    --------------        --------------       ---------    -----------    ------------
                                  |
                            :3310 |
                            -------------
                            |  clamavd  |
                            -------------

E2guardian can also run as an ICAP Server, which gives you the following configuration:

    --------------  :3128---------------    -----------    ------------
    | Webbrowser |------>| ICAP client |--->|Router/FW|--->| Internet |
    --------------       | e.g. squid  |    -----------    ------------
                         ---------------
                                  |
                           :1344  |
                         ----------------
                         |  ICAP server |
                         |  e2guardian  |
                         ----------------
                                 |
                          :3310  |
                          -------------
                          |  clamavd  |
                          -------------

All the above configurations requires to explicitly configure the webbrowser to use the proxy.
(see Section 3.x.x)

If you are running the router, the firewall and e2guardian (and squid) on the same box,
you may consider to use the transparent mode (see Section 3.x.x),
where the router directly forwards the packets to e2guardian:

    --------------  :80  -------------     ------------
    | Webbrowser |------>| Router /  | --->| Internet |
    --------------  :443 | Firewall  |     ------------
                         -------------
                                |
                           :??  | :8443
                         ----------------
                         |  e2guardian  |
                         ----------------
                                 |
                          :3310  |
                          -------------
                          |  clamavd  |
                          -------------




Additional you have to choose if e2guardian should only filter unencrypted websites 
(those sites starting with http://)

But as nowadays most websites use encrypted data transfer (starting with httpS://)
you may enable the MITM mode (see 3.2.x) to filter content from this sites.

### 3.1.1 Filtering groups

A filtering group is a way to identify one or more users who will share some settings, 
for example what's banned and what's allowed.

There are various ways that can be used to identify a user, but the most common ones are

- by IP adress of the machine
- by user name and password
- by Microsoft network credentials (NTLM)

(You will find more details in section 5.x.x Authentication plugins)

In the main configuration file e2guardian.conf you declare how many filtergroups 
you will use, e.g:

    filtergroups = 3

Every filtergroup will then have its own configuration file e2guardianfX.conf
e.g:

    e2guardianf1.conf, e2guardianf2.conf, e2guardianf3.conf

You may name your group with

    groupname = 'my_name_for_group'

and the groupname will be used in the log files and in the HTML template files.

### 3.1.2 Filtering lists

When you install E2G you will find a directory called lists containing various lists to help you define what's allowed and what's blocked. 

There are 4 basic types of lists:

- ban lists, to completely ban a site/url/...
- exception list, to trust something so that it's always allowed
- a grey list, something in between a ban and exception (white) list, which trusts a site but still subjects it to content checking
- phrase lists, that help you allow or ban pages based on the content (words) appearing on the page

For ban, exception and grey lists, there are 4 ways you can express them:

- a straight site ban, ie example.com , which would ban example.com and any subdomain
- a regular expression, ie *.css, which would allow all the css files
- a url, to allow or ban a page, while the rest of the domain can be allowed/banned.
- a mime type, especially useful for files

There's a lot more possible, but should be sufficient to get a decent basic setup.

You will find a more detailed description how to use the filter list in section 3.3.x

### 3.1.3 Words/Phrases lists

This is possibly the most interesting part of E2G because for most people creating a list of what's allowed and what's banned is hard to impossible. Rather ideally the content filter would just recognize when a page is "bad" and block it. Of course this is easier said than done and as a word of warning be ready to have to make adjustments over time.

Put it simply, a words/phrase list is just that, a list of words or phrases with a "score" assigned, either positive or negative. So for example you could have a list such as:

+100 -100 +100

In the group configuration file there is a setting called "naughtiness" which defines a threshold used by the algorithm to decide if a page should be blocked or not and the way it work is by adding the scores and comparing the total to that value.

So for example if you were to visit a page containing the words "cussing", "learning linux" and "badness" its total score would be +100-100+100=100. If your naughtiness level is 50, ie less than the total, the page will be blocked, otherwise it will be allowed.

The problem with phraselists is that of course you can find good words on bad sites and viceversa so it's not unusual to find things banned when they shouldn't or the opposite and that's where tuning comes in.

For more information about phraselists and its syntax please take a look at the old dansguardian docs <http://contentfilter.futuragts.com/wiki/doku.php?id=phraselists>

### 3.1.4 Story files

Story files are used to define the logic flow and allows a more flexible approach to define 
which filter lists are used.
You will find the following story files:

- preauth.story:
  - checks if a client is allowed the use e2guardian (Authorization)
- common.story:
  - checks if the access to the requested site is allowed
  - checks if MITM is allowed
  - checks the response for e.g. virus, filetype, etc
- site.story:
  - for your site you may overwrite some functions from common.story here
- f1.story:
  - for your first filter group  you may overwrite some functions from site.story here

You will find a more detailed description how to use the filter list in section 3.3.x

## 3.2 E2G configuration files and directories

After installation you will find the configuration files in '/etc/e2guardian'
These are:

- e2guardian.conf : main configuration file
- e2guardianf1.conf : configuration file for the first(default) filter group
- common.story, preauth.story, site.story:
    default story files (see section 3.1.4)
- examplef1.story: for the first(default)     filter group

- authplugins: directory with configuration files for the authorization plugins
- contentscanners: directory with configuration files for the content/virus scanner
- downloadmanagers: directory with configuration files for the download manager
    (see section 5. Plugins )

- languages: directory with messages and HTML template files fordifferent languages

- lists: different lists for banned/exception/grey filters (see section )
- lists/authplugins: configuration files for the authorization plugins
- lists/contentscanners:
- lists/bannedrooms: ???
- lists/phraselists: subdirectories with phraselists for different categories/languages

## 3.3 Basic E2G configuration

Without any changes to the configuration files e2guardian will run in a basic mode with:

| option                 | Description                    | Hints              |
|------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------|
| language = 'ukenglish' | used for block page            |
| filtergroups = 1       | only one (default) filtergroup | See section 3.
| filterip = ""          | listening on all IPs           | for servers with multiple nics
| filterports = 8080     | listening on port 8080         |                    |
| enablessl=off          | no MITM                        | see Section        |

You may surf almost all websites (ok, we are blocking websites with the word 'mother****')
but may not download files with some extensions (How? we will explain later..)

You may have look which sites where visited in /var/log/e2guardian.log

### 3.3.1 Block sites by DNS name / IP / URL

So you don't want that your user may visit "www.verybadsite.com" ??
As this will be valid for all users in a group we will look in the
configuration file for the default group: e2guardianf1.conf.

There you will find the following line:

    sitelist = 'name=banned,messageno=500,path=__LISTDIR__/bannedsitelist'

__LISTDIR__ is the base directory for the groups lists directory and is 
configured at the top of the conf file with:

    .Define LISTDIR </etc/e2guardian/lists/example.group> 

So, we now where to find the bannedsitelist file.
Open it with an editor, move to the bottom of the file and add a line with:

     www.verybadsite.com

Save the file, restart e2guardian and your users will no longer be able to access this site.
( and you will see entries in the access.log file with the remark "*DENIED* Blocked site:" when they try to do so )

If you want to block sites by their IP adress, the corresponding entry is:

    ipsitelist = 'name=banned,messageno=510,path=__LISTDIR__/bannedsiteiplist'

and if you would like to block only some parts of the sites, use

    urllist = 'name=banned,messageno=501,path=__LISTDIR__/bannedurllist'

e.g.:
    www.verybadsite.com/registration.html

You may NOT? use wildcards in the URLs ?!?

### 3.3.2 Block sites (with black lists)

You may have noticed that there are already several lines in the bannedsitelist, e.g.

   #.Include</etc/e2guardian/lists/blacklists/adult/domains>

As it would be very cumbersome to add all unwanted sites by hand, there are some
collections of unwanted site categorized in different sections.

Historically they were used with the product squidGuard <http://www.squidguard.org/index.html>
and some lists are hosted on:

- <http://dsi.ut-capitole.fr/blacklists/>
- <http://www.shallalist.de/>
- <https://urlhaus.abuse.ch/api/>   (not tested)
- are there more ?? Please inform us

If you have downloaded the file, unzip it and copy it to '/etc/e2guardian/lists/blacklists'.
You may then remove the comment sign '#' in the bannedsitelist/bannedsiteiplist/bannedurllist
to activate the blacklists.

### 3.3.3 Block sites (with local lists)

But you have several sites, which you want to block, and you maintain this list locally?
Fine, to have the distinction of the standard lists and your local lists we introduced
the follwing options in e2guardianf1.conf:

    sitelist = 'name=localbanned,messageno=560,path=__LISTDIR__/localbannedsitelist'
    ipsitelist = 'name=localbanned,messageno=560,path=__LISTDIR__/localbannedsiteiplist'
    urllist = 'name=localbanned,messageno=561,path=__LISTDIR__/localbannedurllist'

Just copy your lists to these files. (and it will also make your life easier when upgrading e2guardian)

### 3.3.4 Filter sites for BAD words

So you don't want to block whole sites, but only sites where you expect to see some unwanted content?
You can set up a list of "BAD" words and then block the page if "enough" of these words occur on the page.


## 3.4 E2G configuration with squid webproxy

## 3.5 E2G configuration with multiple filtergroups

## 3.6 E2G Configuration for filtering HTTPS/SSL traffic with "Man in the middle" (MITM)

## 3.9 Configuration of clients

When you are using e2guardian in the explicit proxy mode, you have to tell your clients to use this proxy.

### 3.9.1 Windows clients

You can manually set the proxy in windows under Settings > Network & Internet > Proxy.
( see e.g. <https://www.howtogeek.com/tips/how-to-set-your-proxy-settings-in-windows-8.1/> )
This setting will be used by Internet Explorer and Microsoft Edge.
This setting is only valid for the **current** user.

If you are in a Microsoft domain network you may distribute these settings to the clients
by using Group Policy Management (GPO):
<https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/troubleshoot/windows-client/networking/use-group-policy-apply-winhttp-proxy-settings>

If you have other programs/processes which are running under another account (e.g Microsoft defender)
you may try to use the 'netsh winhttp' settings:
<https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/security/threat-protection/microsoft-defender-atp/configure-proxy-internet>

### 3.9.2 Linux clients

On Linux clients you may configure the proxy either in the GUI or in the terminal.
For Ubuntu see e.g.: 
<https://www.serverlab.ca/tutorials/linux/administration-linux/how-to-configure-proxy-on-ubuntu-18-04/>

### 3.9.3 Web Browsers

All Webbrowser have in their configuration settings an option for web proxies. There you may either use 
proxy configured in the OS (system) or choose own settings. See. e.g.
<https://support.mozilla.org/en-US/kb/connection-settings-firefox>

### 3.9.4 Automatic Configuration (WPAD)

As it is cúmbersome to configure many clients by hand you may have a look at the
Web Proxy Auto-Discovery Protocol (WPAD)
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_Proxy_Auto-Discovery_Protocol>
Here is a nice explanation how to setup it on Linux:
<https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/ProxyAutoConfig>

### 3.9.5 Mobile devices

When using mobile phones/tablets/scanners.. you may look here for:

- iOS : <https://www.howtogeek.com/293676/how-to-configure-a-proxy-server-on-an-iphone-or-ipad/>
- Android : <https://www.howtogeek.com/295048/how-to-configure-a-proxy-server-on-android/>

### 3.9.6 and others ....

Sometimes programmers decided to use their own proxy settings in their application.
So you have to search in the programm options for the "proxy" settings.
