# 4. Upgrading

When upgrading from one release to another there may be a chance that some configuration files or options may have changed.
Please read the release notes <> for changes in the different releases.

Before installing the new copy, first make a backup of your existing config
files. For example:

    cp -r /etc/e2guardian/ ~/e2guardian.old/

Then install the new copy.  After doing this, you should re-apply the old
settings, importing them by hand; i.e. any setting you had changed from the
default should be changed in the new e2guardian.conf file, and the same
for other files such as e2guardianf1.conf.  

Every option should be documented by comments in the default configuration file;
these comments are one of the best sources of information as to what a particular setting means.

## Upgrading from e2guardian v5.3 to v5.4

If you are upgrading from v4 please see below.

There are changes to both the configuration files, mainly in the definition
of auth plugins, 

Both the e2guardian.conf and e2guardianf1.conf contain some new list definitions.  

Some new list types are introduced, including maplist, ipmaplist and mapport all
of which are used to map users/ip/ports to filter groups
Details of the new list types definition are in notes/V5_list_definition.pdf. 

A number of settings have been moved into Storyboard config files. 
These are noted in the example e2guardian.conf and e2guardianf1.conf files.

For details on Storyboard syntax see section 7.1 Story Board


## Upgrading from e2guardian v4 to v5

V5 introduces a completely new model for definition and handling of lists, 
logic flow and support for two new modes - transparent(HTTP & HTTPS) and ICAP.

There are changes to the configuration files, mainly in list definition,
(see Section 7.1. Lists definitions ) 
but also some other options have been replaced by storyboard options.

The e2guardian.conf is still used for global settings and 
e2guardianfn.conf for settings specific to group 'n'.  

Both these files contain revised list definitions.  For comptability with
older versions the same list names and paths are retained, so you do
not need to alter your list file structure, unless you want to take
advantage of the new siteiplists.  Details of revised list definition syntax 
is in notes/V5_list_definition.pdf. Note that blanket block is now defined in 
fn.story and dg style blanket blocks (*, *ip etc) in list files are ignored.

A number of settings have been moved into new Storyboard config files. 
These are noted in the example e2guardian.conf and e2guardianf1.conf files.

For details on Storyboard syntax see section 7.1 Story Board

The new Storyboard config files are:-

common.story - a library of storyboard functions - you will not need 
to change this file, but you may need to refer to it if you need to 
make more complex changes to the logic flow.  This provides a logic 
functionality as near as possible to v4 built-in logic.

pre-auth.story - actions to be taken before user is put into a filter
group.  You may need to edit this.

site.story - site deployment modification of Storyboard library - you may
need to edit this in order to change the site-wide logic.

fn.story - one per filtergroup - an examplef1.story is provided - you 
are likely to need to edit this.

UPGRADE PROCEDURE

Before upgrading make a backup of all your v4 configuration & lists. You will
need to refer to these after the install.

Install E2guardian V5 in a clean area.

Edit e2guardian.conf to your requirements. If you are going to use 
transparent mode set the default group for transparent mode.  
Leave proxy_ip commented out unless you need to use an upstream proxy.

Edit each e2guardianfn.conf to your requirements.

Using examplef1.story as a template create a fn.story for each filtergroup, 
actioning any blanket block required.

If you want to use tranparent https mode redirect port 443 to 8443.

## Upgrading from DansGuardian

Both the main configuration file and the filter group configuration file(s) have changed!!

( ??? Check the script(s) in the migration_installation directory for help with this ???)
Read the e2guardian.release file which describes the main feature and enhancements in the different versions of e2guardian.

On the other hand, list files (phrase lists, domain lists, etc.) 
have not changed format, and should largely "just work".
