# 5. Plugins

Since the 2.9 series, DansGuardian uses "plugins" for authentication, content scanning and download management.
Originally, plugins were intended to be built as shared objects, allowing third-party plugins to be maintained 
as separate projects and easily integrated. 
However, getting initial implementations of this idea to compile on platforms other than Linux 
- in fact, even just on machines other than Daniel's development box, by some accounts - 
was problematic, and held up progress considerably.

Eventually the idea was dropped, opting instead for plugins simply being implementations of 
common base classes, compiled directly into the main binary. 
Although less elegant, and less conducive to the development of third-party plugins, 
this has proven simpler to develop and support across the various platforms supported 
by earlier releases, allowing us to stop wrestling with libtool and get some "real" work done.

If you as a developer would like to dive into more details, have a look at section 7.x.x

## 5.1 Authentication plugins

An "authentication plugin" in e2Guardian encapsulates the functionality necessary for 
identifying users and assigning them to groups. 
To perform user identification, authentication plugins are given access to both the client 
and server (parent proxy) connections and the HTTP request headers from the client.
When an authentication plugin successfully identifies a user, the returned string is 
passed back to the plugin to allow it to determine their filter group number.

The authentication plugins have:

- a configuration file in /etc/e2guardian/authplugins
- a list file in /etc/e2guardian/lists/authplugins

The following plugins are currently available:

### 5.1.1 DNS auth plugin

Obtains user and group from domain entry maintained by separate authentication program.

Description: TBD

### 5.1.2 Ident auth plugin

Identifies users via IDENT servers running on client machines

Description: TBD

### 5.1.3 IP auth plugin

Maps client IPs to filter groups.

You may map a single IP, a range of IPs or a whole IP subnet to a filter group.

The configuration file is:  /etc/e2guardian/authplugins/ip.conf
The list file is:           /etc/e2guardian/lists/authplugins/ipgroups

### 5.1.4 Proxy-Basic auth plugin

Identifies usernames in "Proxy-Authorization: Basic" headers;
relies upon the upstream proxy (squid) to perform the actual password check.

### 5.1.5 IP-Port-based auth plugin

Maps IP Ports to filter groups.


## 5.2 Contenscanner plugins

Content scanning plugins are tasked with scanning content and giving a quick clean/not clean answer. 
They are queried as a last step, after all other forms of filtering; 
this is such that content from sites in the exceptionsitelist can still be scanned, 
and time is not wasted performing content scanning on content blocked by simpler filtering rules. 

The original focus for content scanners is performing anti-virus scanning;
and in the decision to block content if scanning fails (as it may be harmful).

In similar fashion to how not all methods of download management are suitable for all HTTP clients,
not all file types are suitable for content scanning. 
In particular, streaming audio and video cannot be scanned using the current implementation, 
as it relies upon downloading content in its entirety before scanning it. 
(Where AV is concerned, scanning of partial content is not generally useful or supported anyway.)

You may activate a contentscanner with the following option in the main configuration file e2guardian.conf:

    contentscanner = '/etc/e2guardian/contentscanners/clamdscan.conf'

Currently only clamdscan and icapscan are supported. The commandlinescan plugin may be used but is not recommended for larger systems.

To control which file extensions / mime types / sites or urls should NOT be handled by a contentscanner
you may use the lists defined in '/etc/e2guardian/lists/contentscanners'.
To enable a list you enable a option in the filtergroup configuration file e.g. e2guardianf1.conf:

    mimelist = 'name=exceptionvirus,path=__LISTDIR__/../contentscanners/exceptionvirusmimetypelist'

As contentscanning is disabled by default, you have to cahnge the site.story file.
There you will find two empty functions:

    function(checknoscanlists)
    function(checknoscantypes)

You have to disable this lines by prepending them with the comment char #.
(Then the same function declared in common.story will become active)

## 5.3 Downloadmanager plugins

Download managers are tasked with preventing client connections from timing out whilst large files are downloaded for virus scanning, bearing in mind that it is not acceptable to send the client the (whole) file before scanning has completed. Exactly what is sent in lieu of the actual download is up to the plugin implementation.

There are currently three downloadmanagers:

- default: which does not send any parts of the file
- trickle: which sends real data but holds back part of it until scanning is complete
- fancy:  which sends something completely different, followed eventually by a link from which the actual file can be retrieved

Which downloadmanager should be used is configured in e2guardian.conf:

    downloadmanager = '/etc/e2guardian/downloadmanagers/default.conf'

In the configuration files for the downloadmanagers you may configure to use a list of e.g. mimetypes which should be handled

    managedmimetypelist = '/etc/e2guardian/lists/donwloadmanagers/managedmimetypelist'

