# 8. For Developers

The following sections are mainly recommended for software developers, who are looking
of detailed information of the implementation of e2guardian.

## 8.1 Install from sources

Before you can compile from sources you need the standard development tools installed such as:

    autoconf, autogen, automake, make, gcc, git, glibc, libadns1-dev, libpthread-stubs0-dev, libpcre3-dev, libssl-dev.

If you are on a debian based distro you can install all the needed dependencies by referencing the one e2guardian uses by running the following command:

    apt-get build-dep e2guardian

**For that to work** you will need to have a source mirror in your /etc/apt/sources.list.

### 8.1.1 Getting E2G sources

E2G sources can be downloaded directly from the git repository or from a tarball. 
Tarballs are available at the release page: <https://github.com/e2guardian/e2guardian/releases/latest>

**Selecting a git branch to compile**

If you are trying to compile a specific version or test the dev version, 
you should be cloning the git repository and then use whatever target branch
is appropriate for your task. So for example if you are interested in the dev branch, 
at the time of speaking,that would be v5develop.

Steps:

    git clone https://github.com/e2guardian/e2guardian.git
    cd e2guardian
    git branch -a (to list all the branches. Note master will have a * next to it indicating it's the selected branch)
    git checkout v5develop (if you wanted to compile the v5develop release)
    git branch -a (to confirm that you have v5develop branch selected, again look for the * next to it)

Done. Enjoy compiling.

## 8.2 Folder structure

You will find the following folders:

    * configs : contains the config files (e2guardian.conf, etc) and the list files
    * data/languages : messages and HTML teplmate files for different languages
    * data/scripts : script files and an example Dockerfile
    * doc : dokumentation in Markdown format
    * gitlabci : configuration files for GitLab builds
    * m4 : ???
    * src : the c++ source files

## 8.3 Configure, make, install, run

    1. get the sources code either by downloading a tar from the releases page 
       <https://github.com/e2guardian/e2guardian/releases> or by cloning the repository:
       git clone https://github.com/e2guardian/e2guardian.git
    2. cd into the e2guardian directory
    3. run ./autogen.sh
    4. ./configure '--prefix=/usr' '--sysconfdir=/etc' '--localstatedir=/var' '--with-proxyuser=e2guardian' '--with-proxygroup=e2guardian'  '--enable-clamd=yes' '--enable-icap=yes'  '--enable-ntlm=yes' '--enable-pcre=yes' '--enable-sslmitm=yes' 'CPPFLAGS=-mno-sse2 -g -O2'
    5. run make , this will compile e2guardian
    6. run make install to install the e2guardian binaries

That's it, you should now have a working e2guardian binary.

You may choose from several options for configuring the system. 
The default configuration will install all e2guardian files under /usr/local, so you may consider to set --prefix.

The most commonly used are:

    --prefix=PREFIX             install architecture-independent files in PREFIX [/usr/local]
    --enable-clamd[=no]         Enable support for the ClamD content scanner    
    --enable-sslmitm[=no]       Enable support for the SSL MITM plugin
    --enable-icap[=no]          Enable support for ICAP AV server content scanner
    --with-proxyuser[=nobody]   name of proxy user (we recommend e2guardian)
    --with-proxygroup[=nobody]  name of proxy group (we recommend e2guardian)

If you want to debug e2guardian with gdb you should enable the debug options:

    --with-debug_high[=off]     switch on high level debug build mode
    --with-debug_low[=off]      switch on low level debug build mode

you can read all options with './configure --help'

At this point you have a working binary, but without a few more touches it won't actually start.
Per settings above, e2g has been configured to run as the user e2guardian.
If the user is absent on your system e2g won't start. How to create a new user is beyond the scope
of this doc, but be sure to do so or change the config options above and recompile.

Furthermore by default e2g will try to log to /var/log/e2guardian/access.log . 
That directory won't exist so you need to create it!

## 8.4 Contribute


## 8.5 Code structure


## 8.6 Plugin development

see file <8.5. Plugin Development>
